Requirements for Service Providers Delivering
Children and Family Treatment and Supports Services (CFTSS)
and Children’s Home and Community Based Services (HCBS)
and Working Collaboratively with Providers
The New York State Department of Health (DOH), the New York State Office of Mental
Health (OMH), the New York State Office of Addiction Services and Support (OASAS),
the New York State Office for People With Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) and
the New York State Office of Children and Family Services (OCFS) regularly review
provider compliance with requirements to deliver specifically defined services under the
Medicaid program.
Service providers delivering Children and Family Treatment and Supports Services
(CFTSS) and/or Children’s Home and Community Based Services (HCBS) must meet
the following requirements:
• Be a qualified provider as described in subdivision (c) of Title 18 Section 505.38-
Children’s Behavioral Health and Health Services and maintain any required
license, certification, designation, or approval
• Be in good standing according to the standards of each agency by which it is
licensed, certified, designated, or approved
• Possess, acquire, and retain any State licensure, certification, authorization, or
credential when required
• Be a fiscally viable agency
• Be enrolled as a NY Medicaid Provider with an active provider identification
number prior to commencing service delivery
• Be designated by the NYS Children’s Provider Designation Review Team
• Have appropriate agreements in place for any outsourced administrative
functions, if applicable
For HCBS:
• Be a qualified provider as described in the Children’s Home and Community
Based Services Provider Manual (found HERE) and any subsequent updates
• Be compliant with the HCBS Settings Rule (found HERE)
For CFTSS:
• Adhere to the Standards of Care described in the Medicaid State Plan Children
and Family Treatment and Support Services Provider Manual for Children’s
Behavioral Health Early and Periodic Screening and Diagnostic Treatment
(EPSDT) Services (found HERE) and any subsequent updates
March 2020 Page 1 of 4

Provider Medicaid Enrollment
Each provider delivering these services must be enrolled as a Medicaid provider with an
active provider identification number. A list of provider types and the application can be
found on the eMedNY website (HERE); questions can also be directed to the eMedNY
Call Center at 1-800-343-9000. Additional information for designated CFTSS and HCBS
providers can be found in the March 8, 2019 State memo Medicaid Provider Enrollment
for Individual Practitioners and Designated Agencies.
Provider Designation
As a prerequisite to providing any of the CFTSS or HCBS services, a provider must
receive a designation from the NYS Children’s Provider Designation Review Team
representative of DOH, OMH, OASAS, OPWDD, or OCFS. Being designated and
authorized to provide services is not a substitute for possessing any required State
licensure, certification, authorization, or credential, and any such designation may be
conditioned upon obtaining or modifying a rhequired licensure, certification, authorization,
or credential.
Services subject to designation include Children and Family Treatment and Supports
Services (CFTSS):
• Other Licensed Practitioner (OLP) • Family Peer Supports and Services
• Community Psychiatric Supports and (FPSS)
Treatment (CPST) • Youth Peer Supports and Training
• Psychosocial Rehabilitation (PSR) (YPST)
• Crisis Intervention (CI)
Also subject to designation are the following Children’s Home and Community Based
Services (HCBS) authorized under the 1915(c) Children’s Waiver for children/youth with
various disabilities, including serious emotional disturbance, medical fragility (with or
without developmental disabilities), and children in foster care with developmental
disabilities:
• Respite (Crisis and Planned) • Community Advocacy and Support
• Community Habilitation • Palliative Care - Expressive Therapy
• Day Habilitation • Palliative Care - Massage Therapy
• Caregiver Family Supports and • Palliative Care - Bereavement
Services • Palliative Care - Pain and Symptom
• Prevocational Services Management
• Supported Employment
March 2020 Page 2 of 4

Environmental Modifications, Vehicle Modification, Adaptive and Assistive Equipment
and Non-Medical Transportation are not subject to designation by the NYS Children’s
Provider Designation Review Team.
To be eligible for designation, a provider must submit an application to the NYS
Children’s Provider Designation Review Team for review. The application and
instructions can be found HERE. All designated providers will be assigned a lead State
agency (DOH, OASAS, OCFS, OMH, or OPWDD), based on the primary population
served, location, and indicated line of business on the provider application. A Lead
State agency will be responsible for collaborating with the other State agencies in the
monitoring and oversight of the provider.
CFTSS and HCBS services may only be rendered by a designated agency. Designated
agencies retain all responsibility for services provided, quality of care, and assuring
Medicaid compliance. Billing for CFTSS or HCBS should be completed using the
responsible designated agency’s NPI and MhMIS ID, unless one of the options below is
followed. If a designated agency would like to collaborate with another designated
agency to provide services they cannot provide, or to collaborate for the purposes of
coordination of care, they will refer the child directly for services to the other agency.
Once the referral is made, only the designated agency providing the service will be able
to bill for the referred service, unless there is an agreement between the agencies as
outlined below.
Outsourced Administrative Functions
In response to stakeholders’ request and to assist providers who have limited
administrative capacity, the following are allowable agreements to outsource
administrative functions such as submitting claims, verifying client eligibility, or to obtain
service authorizations.
The Medicaid program will only make payment to the actual provider of the medical
care, services, or supplies. Medicaid payments can be made to a business agent,
including a service bureau, billing service, or accounting firm; if the payment is made in
the name of the provider and the agent’s compensation for the services is related
to the cost of processing the claim, is not based on a percentage or other basis
related to the amount billed or collected, and is not dependent upon collection of
the payment. Billing service companies may submit claims on behalf of providers for
both fee-for-service and managed care.
Per 18 NYCRR §504.9(a)(1), subcontractors who are employed by enrolled Medicaid
providers to perform these allowable activities must enroll as Medicaid Service Bureau
March 2020 Page 3 of 4

providers for fee-for-service. Likewise, within managed care, to perform allowable
activities aside from submitting claims, subcontractors must be part of an Independent
Practice Association (IPA).
Within the fee-for-service model, a Service Bureau is an entity which submits claims,
verifies patient eligibility, or obtains service authorizations for providers enrolled in
Medicaid. Any provider desiring to submit claims, verify client eligibility, or obtain service
authorizations for or on behalf of any other provider must enroll as a Service Bureau in
addition to enrolling as a provider of medical care, services, or supplies. The enrollment
application can be found HERE, along with applicant requirements, information on
completing the application, and supplemental materials.
Compensation to Services Bureaus must be related to the cost of processing the claim
and not a percentage of the amount billed or collected; service bureau compensation
may not be dependent upon collection of the payment.
Within Medicaid managed care, Independent Practice Associations (IPA) are legal
business entities created to arrange for the provision of health care services by licensed
or certified health care providers through contracted agreements with one or more
certified Managed Care Organizations. IPAs must meet the IPA Formation
Requirements and obtain consent from the Commissioner of the Department of Health
prior to filing a certification of incorporation with the Secretary of State.
In an Employee/Provider Lease Agreement (ELA), a Medicaid-enrolled and MCO-
credentialed provider act as the lead agency and subcontracts for services with other
providers – all services are billed under the lead agency Taxpayer Identification
Number. The agency providing the service must be designated to provide the services
per the State Designation process. The lead agency takes primary responsibility for
compliance and quality assurance of all subcontracted agencies, including
administrative tasks such as recording keeping and billing. Typically, the lead agency
pays a per-provider fee to the subcontracted agencies not a percentage or other basis
to the amount billed or collected. ELAs are allowable for both fee-for-service and
managed care.
March 2020 Page 4 of 4